are you confused don't worry if you are
because i have gary stevenson
former city trader now inequality
economist on the show to explain it all
gary thank you so much for joining us
hi michael thanks for having me um so uh
to start now you know you're talking to
someone with not a great deal of
knowledge about the stock market and so
what i know about you know hedge funds
they normally gamble on the stock market
sometimes they win money sometimes they
lose
the same goes for retail investors they
lots of ordinary people
bet on the stock market sometimes they
win sometimes they lose
um you know on one level that's just
what's happening
here so what's what's special about
what's being going on with with gamestop
this week
well i mean the reason it's all over the
news the scale of what's happened
this week is phenomenal right like you
said it's gone one thousand seventeen
hundred
percent in in about two weeks um that's
you know it increases 17 times
um this the speed in the scale is
enormous and
we don't normally see things like this
it's basically taking down a massive
wall street hedge fund
um i think we need to put this in a
little bit of context of what's been
happening over the last year right
obviously the us is in the middle of
corona it's like us there's millions of
people sitting at home they can't work
they're not able to get an income and in
that period the stock market has been
flying through the roof
amazon stock price has doubled that's
jeff bezos's net worth
tesla's up about five times bitcoin's
doing whatever bitcoin is doing
ordinary people are sitting home trying
to work but works not working for them
right they can't make any money
and they're just seeing the wealthiest
people their money in the stock market
just
absolutely making tons and this is on
top of 12 years since 2008 when the
stock market has gone up i think five or
six times
so i think what you're seeing is
ordinary people starting to realize that
you know we have a stock market that it
goes up in good times and it goes up in
bad times
whatever happens the rich seems to be
protected and ordinary workers are not
so they want to get involved
i think really this is the culmination
of many years of ordinary people getting
left behind
of the stock market is getting bailed
out when those only people aren't
and um yeah obviously this is this is
the culmination of it people getting
together on reddit and starting to
it's not really it's not even just
gamestop they're going into other things
now
um i think this is ordinary people they
don't want to
well they want their share of the pie
basically they see it keep going just
the stock markets and they want to get
involved
yes you you brought up this is you know
ordinary people against wall street
that's what we're going to discuss
next you know the extent to which this
is a popular uprising or just a
get-rich-quick plan by some
people on reddit um to before we do that
to sort of frame this discussion i want
to go to a couple of clips
um from cnbc so that's the financial
news channel in the united
states so the first clip i'm going to
show you is from william legate he is
founder
and ceo of a cryptocurrency platform and
a follower of the wall street bets
subreddit he explained how he
characterizes the gamestop phenomenon
on cnbc these people are just
in general wanting to give wall street
the finger quite frankly
um they view the the system as being
rigged against them i think that this
entire movement has
really validated that and made it very
clear to most americans that that is the
case
um you have if i personally invested my
own money and lost half of my portfolio
overnight
no one on wall street would you know
would care at all if a hedge fund loses
half their money overnight all of a
sudden
you can't trade anymore and you know
they stop
the free market in order to allow these
funds to rebalance their positions i
think that that's extremely wrong and
against you know everything that the
market's supposed to be standing for
from your following of them do the
people in this subreddit
who are calling to take down the hedge
funds realize that there could be some
serious unintended consequences that
could hurt everyday people
for the most part i think absolutely um
this subreddit is pretty
uh crude i guess you could say and a lot
of people a big part of it even before
this wall street vets movement was
posting people's
losses and that's just part of the
culture of the subreddit
um a lot of these people are not and
this necessarily for the money
um certainly some retail traders are and
i
feel like some people will end up you
know getting lats holding the bag
but uh for the most part these people
are just wanting to make a statement and
they kind of view this as class warfare
quite quite frankly um kind of
occupy wall street uh 2.0 but on their
own terp and with real financial
consequences
saying this is class warfare but with
real financial
consequences now someone from the ruling
class who was getting pretty upset about
it is a wall street trader leon
cooperman now he is a hedge fund manager
he's worth 3.2
billion dollars here again he is
speaking um this again is on cnbc
the reason the market is doing what he's
doing is people are sitting at home
getting the checks from the government
okay and this fair share is a
concept
it's just a way of attacking wealthy
people and
you know i think it's inappropriate we
all got to work together and pull
together
so he the the first as being a
concept that was about tax
um i think but he basically has the
analysis that the problem here is that
too many people are getting government
checks
um and then the plebs are investing on
the stock market and this is messing the
whole thing up
um gary i want to bring you in i mean
we've they've brought up class war there
is this a genuine sort of redistribution
of wealth and power from corporate
elites to the ordinary man
is is that a legitimate analysis of
what's
what's been going on over the past week
uh i wish i wish
there was michael um it's so it's so
fascinating isn't it that sort of
this is the space we've reached now
where it's it's such an interesting
combination of
people out there trying to make money in
the markets which is such a sort of
individual individualistic i want to
make money
for me idea but they're coming together
on this message board to try and do it
together it's this so it's this super
combination of
i want to make money for me and we need
to do it together i think this is
in a sense it was kind of inevitable
that we were gonna reach this space
right because
you know people are told that you live
in a meritocracy you have to do what you
can get a job save up your money buy a
house
but increasingly that doesn't work and
then at the same time you see people
you know i i come from a poor background
i made my money in the sea basically
gambling and i don't know many people
who come from ordinary backgrounds
who've been able to for example buy a
house
just by working an ordinary job but
people see oh this guy's made money on
bitcoin
that guy's made money in the stock
markets so i think it's kind of reached
this inevitable conclusion where
people have realized that even just to
achieve your basic goals
it's not working work isn't working so
they've tried to get together and
they've tried to rebalance it you know
on an internet messaging board but um
to be honest i don't think this is gonna
look fantastic for the people who made
money on this but my concern really is
people are gonna maybe watch this or
it's been all over the news the last
couple of days they're gonna see it now
they're gonna think well this is my
chance they're going to jump in and um
you know at some point this stock is
going to fall and i'm a bit i just want
to tell the people that are listening
don't take any mad risks and run into
this now because it's not it's not easy
money to be made basically and
this is you know i wish the revolution
could happen
from people at home trading the stock
markets in their underpants but i think
it's not going to go like that
i'm not sure anyone watches tiscue south
for financial advice so you probably you
probably don't need to worry too much
about that but
but i do want to focus on that question
actually in terms of what is going to
happen
next for the people who've invested in
this company especially because
presumably at this point gamestop is
overvalued so it's worth a hell of a lot
on the stock market at the moment even
though the underlying business
isn't particularly valuable and if
you've got a bubble you normally expect
it to burst at some point so
that share price is going to collapse
and if you're still holding shares at
that point in time
then you lose a lot is is is that
inevitable now we're just going to
inevitably see lots of reddit users or
people who've piled in because of this
you know because of the publicity
publicity around this lose a bunch of
money or is there a different possible
route you know out of this current
moment than that
i mean this is such an interesting
bubble right because normally when you
have a bubble there's some people out
there saying no it's not a bubble
it's different this is real fundamental
value here is a bubble here is a
massively overvalued stock where
literally everyone who's driving the
bubble
thinks it's overvalued it's just
everybody knows it's a bad investment
they're still doing it and
you know i use this message board wall
street bets like i've been going on it
for
for a year if you get some free time
have a look it's a fascinating place
um i was on it this morning people are
going it's like a religion people are
screaming at each other don't sell
they think they're starting a revolution
basically so um
it's driven by this sort of collective
madness and i totally understand i
totally understand this feeling that
these guys are more streets of making
millions you know jeff bezos is making
billions elon musk is making billions
we're sitting at home we can't even work
i totally i totally understand that
sentiment
um but to be honest i cannot see this
playing out any other way then it's
eventually
collapsing and there will be people left
holding it that will lose
money when it happens i would be very
very very surprised and to be honest
i think even the people driving would
surely be surprised it's the most
phenomenal
bubble where everybody knows it's a
bubble and um but
i think it's important to understand
this is not coming out of nowhere right
last year in the kobe crisis the
government spent 450 billion pounds
right that's 10 000
pounds for every adult in the country
they didn't raise any taxes
they didn't borrow money from external
investors they printed all of that money
and they pulled it into the system
so what you have here is a government
that thinks we can deal with the crisis
by printing money and giving it to the
rich because the data shows all that
money ended up with the rich
look if you try and fix a crisis that
has inequality at its core
by giving money to the rich you can't be
surprised when suddenly you see massive
stock market bubbles
and my big concern is that contagious
into uk property and we see a massive
rise in uk property now
and what that will mean for young people
in this country
if we start seeing this bubble move into
uk property which i think quite possibly
it will
i think we should definitely let's park
the uk property question for a moment
because i think we should definitely get
you back on
you know especially particularly on that
question which might have more practical
significance for a lot of people
watching this but i want to stick to
this phenomenon
of gamestop and specifically now move on
to the role of robin
hood and because robin hood is the the
app where people can trade stocks and
shares without any commissions so this
is the kind of app which has
allowed ordinary people to to trade on
on the stock market without having
you know a broker or an agent and
yesterday
when this you know the prices of
gamestop were really surging
they suspended trading and this was
incredibly controversial people thought
this was sort of market manipulation
the big guys coming in to stop the
little guy
having some influence and opposition to
the suspension came from
all sides of the political spectrum um
so to
prove that to you the evidence this is
alexandria ocasio-cortez
she tweeted this is unacceptable we now
need to know more about robin hood apps
decision to block retail investors from
purchasing stock
while hedge funds are freely able to
trade the stock as they see fit
as a member of the financial services
committee i'd support a hearing
if necessary you also got someone from
the right wing of the republican party
ted cruz
tweeting in agreement so he quote
tweeted that tweet i've just read to you
saying
fully agree now robin hood
themselves so the firm the ceo has gone
on television saying this is just
because of volatile trading meaning that
they had a bit of a cash flow problem
not them intervening on behalf of any
hedge funds who were losing money
although i can see in the comments um
someone has tweeted
with a 10 pound superchat that's kishor
kukandraja i hope i pronounce your your
name correctly
um they say gary what do you think of
citadel's role in robin hood in all of
this and that's a reference to some
people are suggesting
that there could be connections between
robin hood and citadel who are a hedge
fund who are losing money
on gamestop shares because they'd short
sold it and they think that maybe there
was some collusion going on here i don't
know gary what
what do you make of this decision by the
robin hood app to suspend
trading i mean it's such a story isn't
it who would have thought finally the
thing to unite the factual divide in the
u.s would be
the right of people to do wild
speculative gambling on the stock market
finally
finally something that everybody can
agree on um listen
i would have loved to have been a fly on
the wall in that robin hood head office
when they decided to suspend
trading and um there's lots of people
with lots of ideas about what's
happening people are saying that
yeah it's owned by a citadel and sicily
got powerful political connections and
uh
they don't want wall street to get hurt
listen i can't tell you whether that's
what happened i'm sure that robin hood
themselves would say we're trying to
protect investors or we have legitimate
financial reasons why we can't do it
um listen i guarantee you there'll be
people in wall street that are not happy
about
suddenly a huge amount of financial
market power being held by
uh random guys trading on um reddit
but i wouldn't be able to tell you with
any certainty uh
whether there was actually a shady
meeting behind closed doors between um
wall street bankers and politicians and
the guys who own robin hood um
i would love to know more and hopefully
um alexandra casey cortez will
get her request for more information
because um the people on reddit are
furious about it and i can totally
understand i mean
they've got a massive position and
suddenly they can't trade if it was me
i'd be furious too but um
i wish i could tell you the exact
reasons that there were some shady
dealings behind closed doors i'm afraid
i don't know the truth
i want to talk now a bit more about
whether this phenomenon which is sort of
like
individual retail traders individual
individuals individual individuals
individual people in their bedrooms
um trading on the stock market but
talking to each other about it could
transform capitalism in some way now
there are lots of people saying
discussing quite rightly that this sort
of adds an element of unpredictability
into the stock market because it's not
just
gamestop who have gone up in value it's
lots of
other brands which were seen as not
having much of a future by
wall street and they're often brands
which you know people have some
emotional connection to so gamestop was
a shot people
shopped out in their in their childhood
a bit like you know you think of
blockbusters
um here i know you have game it wasn't
particularly meaningful to me
um also i think nokia's doing quite well
blackberry's doing quite well there's a
cinema chain
um in the united states that's doing
quite well because people are piling in
money
and one analysis is that this is sort of
basically you know it's kind of like
financial posting in a way
other people though are arguing that
this distributed manner of investing
could itself be
a more efficient form of capitalism than
that which is managed on
wall street and to introduce this point
i want to show you
a video which is of the ceo of social
capital explaining again to cnbc
why he thinks that wall street's bet is
not just an fu to the wall street
establishment it is also that
but that it's also the site of better
investments than what hedge funds
are capable of and i would encourage
anybody who
is dismissive of this thing to go into
wall street bets and actually just read
the forums
and i think that you're going to see
three kinds of posts
the first kind of content are a lot of
people doing some
incredible fundamental diligence on
companies
trying to think about long-term value
and in my opinion many of them are doing
as good and frankly
a better job than a lot of hedge fund
analysts that i work with
that's number one the second are a lot
of people who believe
that you know coming out of 2008 what
happened was wall street took an
enormous amount of risk
and they left retail as the bag holder
and a lot of these kids
were in grade school and high school
when that happened they lost their homes
their parents lost their jobs and
they've always wondered like why
did those folks get bailed out for
taking enormous amounts of risk
and nobody helped and showed up to help
my family
and then the third thing is a
realization that instead of having
idea dinners or you know quiet whispered
conversations amongst hedge funds in the
hamptons
these kids have the courage to do it
transparently in a forum and i'm not
saying all of it is perfect
by any means but i think it takes
an enormous amount of faith in the
system to be that transparent
to talk about things and then for each
individual to make their own mind up
and to do things whether it's to buy
into
so what i found quite interesting there
was this phrase the faith in the system
you know because most people are talking
about this as a deeply you know
anti-establishment movement potentially
anti-capitalist
what that commentator there was
suggesting was that potentially
this could reinvigorate capitalism if
you've got all of these people
trading stocks in their bedrooms who can
make you know collectively more
efficient and more transparent decisions
than
hedge fund managers having quiet dinners
with each other then potentially this
could
you know this could be a boost to
overall economic growth potentially i
mean you're almost looking at kind of
you know
democratic capitalism but of the sort of
individualistic
thatcher kind in a way i mean what do
you make of that gary this this idea
that actually these could be more
efficient investors
than the wall street brokers so it's not
just a disruptive force it could also be
a highly
efficient force i mean i've spoken a lot
this year
about what we've seen in the last 10
years because governments and central
banks have been trying to deal with
crises like i say by printing huge
amounts of money
we've come to this position where as i
say
if the economy does well stock markets
go up if the economy does badly
the central bank prints loads of money
and stock markets still go up and we've
really had this divergence here whatever
happens stock markets do well
and ordinary people do badly and you
know i've put out videos on my instagram
and on my facebook gary's economics
explaining
how people can deal with this because
when house prices and stock prices go
through the roof but wages don't
it really really hurts especially young
people because they can't save up money
they can't get a house and um
for this reason i totally understand why
people have surged towards online
trading platforms
as a easier way to access stock markets
because they want to get a share of the
returns that have largely been going to
the richest people because most stocks
are owned by the richest people
for that reason especially in this last
year we've seen a massive massive uptick
in the number of people using online
trading accounts like ig index in this
country trading 212 this kind of thing
and i think it's really important to
talk about this because on the one hand
it's important that ordinary people are
able to participate
in these markets and take some of the
returns that super rich people are
getting
but the truth is if you're super rich
and you've got 1 million 2 million 10
million pounds
you can make loads of money on the stock
markets if you're an ordinary person
saying with 10 20 000 pounds
it's going to be very difficult for you
to do that and often these people they
go onto these trading platforms they
don't really have a full idea of what
they're doing
sometimes these trading platforms can
allow you to make very risky bets and
people don't realize just how much risk
they're taking and people can lose
all of the money they put in potentially
and i think 75 percent of people who use
this ig index trading website lose money
so i don't i don't want to give the
impression this is some mad
democratizing force because look i'm a
market professional and i've made quite
a bit of money and i make money when i'm
trading my stock markets but if some guy
who doesn't know what he's doing
puts his life savings in there he's
probably going to be in that 75 percent
so i think the end result is
i don't think we're gonna transform
capitalism and radically redistribute
wealth just by everybody becoming a
stock market trader because in the end
the best stock market traders are going
to end up working for the wealthiest
people and
you know if you're just you know an
electrician or a hairdresser sitting at
home
on the internet you're probably not
going to quadruple your money in fact
you are likely to be in that 75
so you know it's very typical that the
way the world is
right now you know all this wolf of wall
street the idolization of money and
trading people think well we can reform
capitalism by all becoming traders
but i think in reality the most likely
situation is the professionals will make
money the people with the most
experience make money and the ordinary
people
will be left with the losses um
well that's a well it's downbeat note to
end our coverage of this story
jane hayward with a fiver says great
story great coverage great
guest um i couldn't agree more you've
been a great guest gary stevenson
um thank you so much for joining us this
evening we'll definitely get you back
soon um
if there's a housing crisis next if the
housing bubble will pop which actually
maybe wouldn't be a crisis but
we'll save that conversation yes yes we
will until next time thanks so much
michael
have a good day nice one